# Preface

This book is long overdue. I planned on guiding people interested in ensemble testing to my other book, Ensemble Programming Guidebook with 1st edition published in a conference in New York on November 5th, 2015. With the eight years of experiencing ensemble testing, I have written articles, spoken about ensemble testing on numerous conferences, run demo ensembles on stage, and taught hundreds of people to test better in ensemble format. I've moved from early naming (mob testing) to more inclusive naming and loved seeing the community follow in new language. We've also seen the rise of ensemble working by Emily Bache, moving away from ideas leading to subsets of the work we do.

What changed my plans? The realization that the skills transfer problem in skilled contemporary exploratory testing is not resolved without sharp focus on it specifically. We are increasingly teaching great testing to everyone in teams, and requiring more impactful ways of transferring those skills. As a mechanism of teaching testing skills, ensemble testing shines. We don't know what we don't know, but we recognize the surprise of a new thing when we see someone apply it.

I dedicate this book to my fellow ensemble testing experts: Lisi Hocke, Elisabeth Zagroba, Joep Schuurkes, and Andrea Jensen. We need more people sharing the joys of ensemble testing from stage to bring up a community that knows this social software testing technique and can transform their experiences with it.

I'm grateful for everyone who has participated in ensemble testing I have facilitated and been part of teaching me all these lessons I now collect into this book. Looking back at my teaching, I started with teaching through stories of testing, evolved to encouraging pair testing in training situations with regular retrospectives, but only when ensemble testing came about, I had a mechanism of seeing the teaching distributed in a group to skills in use that I could guide for better with feedback and showing example in context of the task we're doing.

Ensemble testing has been transformative. This book should give you a solid idea of what to try.